---
layout:     post   				    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      A Case Study Of Career Path  	# 标题 
subtitle:   Growth as Data Science Consultant #副标题
date:       2023-04-09 				# 时间
author:     Cassiel Huo  						# 作者
header-img: img/bg_1.jpeg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
mathjax: true                       # 是否启用 MathJax
tags:								#标签

---

> This is based on a University of Melbourne's case study on specific career path, aimed to provide information resource for STEM students whether they should choose this career or not. -- Author: Cassiel


## The Needs of Data Scientist Consultants
To become a Data Scientist (DS for short) in a consulting firm, it is important to have a deep understanding of the nature and needs of consulting, as well as a knowledge of modern data-driven technologies. People discover that migrating from traditional working style into technology innovation integrated with cutting-edge AI solution and advanced analytical business insights are the way-out of traditional business and industries. According to McKinsey on 2013, if earlier-staged big-data revolution can be scaled up into systematical wild impact, then this “could account for $300 billion to $450 billion in reduced health-care spending, or 12 to 17 percent of the $2.6 trillion baseline in US health-care costs”. 

However, this is revolution is especially challenging to progress for big corporations that have a highly stable organizational structure and are often unwilling to change from within. Therefore, it could be a good idea for them to hire external third-party consultants and let them providing expertise and constructive suggestions from an objective point of view. Doing so is not only cost-saving but also time-efficient, especially when coordinating across multiple functioning departments within the corporation becomes difficult. Despite all the above reasoning for large corporations, people may wonder why is it necessary to have external data-specialist if small and medium-sized companies already start building their own data science team. Data Science consultants are professionals that experienced rigorous background check and interview process who worked full time within consulting company with state-of-art skills and valuable experiences, they can provide customized digital transformation strategy accordingly or assist the in-house DS team’s onboarding and assessments.

## What is DS Consultant's Daily Working Routine?
Now this leads to the next valuable question as what is really a daily working routine for Data Scientist in consulting firm? To well present responds to that question, it’s important to take a step back and first look at a bigger picture of their working stream rather than working details. In top-tier consulting firms, Data Science consultants generally begin at the junior level and are assigned to specific projects that involve working directly with clients from a wide range of industries with varying needs. People maybe curious that whether they are supposed to work simultaneously on multiple projects or across different departments since they are called “Data Science Consultant”? While this may be the case for some senior roles or small to medium-sized consulting companies, it is generally not the case in large consulting firms. The reason of working full-time for single project is to ensure their working quality when deliver the solution to client and what’s more important is to foster the ability of self-sustain. Then the detailed working routine really
depends on the current project requirements. For example the deliverable solution could be as simple as a script or a well-tune machine learning model to a specific business case, or could be as complex as involved in the hiring process to assist client company to build its own data science team and all the further onboarding tasks. The duration of each project also really depends on project’s scale and level of difficulty, ranging from a few weeks to a year or more if it is a long-term project.

A more specific example of the aforementioned process could be when a merchant requests the assistance of a Data Science consulting team to use machine learning algorithms in order to determine which customers are more likely to repurchase their products, thereby allowing them to create their next marketing strategy. Then the whole process would be start with collecting historical sales data related to consumer behavior and followed by conducting all necessary data pre-processing steps. It comes next with candidate model selection for example this case it could be Random Forest given its property of easy understanding under business logic. Finally a simple summarization or visualization dashboard could be the also part of deliverable when presenting to the client.

During this process, a junior Data Science consultant heavily depends on the senior consultants with whom he works closely within the same project initially when first starting his career path in a consulting firm. Additionally, he has to communicate and cooperate with the client’s Data Science team from time to time to actively understand their business needs. This naturally introduces the next debatable topic: what qualifications are required for a successful Data Science consultant candidate from both technical and soft skill perspectives?

## What are the key qualifications?
Starting from a technical perspective, a job description typically requires applicants to have an educational background in computer science or related fields. This is to ensure that candidates have a fundamental understanding and proficiency in coding and programming. The specific technology stack required may vary based on company-specific requirements, but popular programming languages for Machine Learning include Python, and common visualization tools include Tableau. However, what sets exceptional candidates apart is their ability to construct research problems and solve complex situations by breaking them down into smaller parts.
However, working as a Data Science consultant isn't just about coding, charts, or scripts. What's more important are the so-called "soft skills". These skills include tailoring the reporting content for clients with non-technical backgrounds, ensuring the quality of deliverables by establishing trust and credibility at the outset, effectively communicating and collaborating with both the team and the client, and evaluating the required duration and adjusting the workload accordingly to maintain a work-life balance. Factors like these play a big role in determining whether an individual can develop a successful career as a Data Science consultant.

## How about the pros and cons of being DS Consultant?
People would then start discussing some pros and cons of working in consulting firms as a data specialist. The very first advantage that comes into mind would be how this challenging work style is beneficial to personal development and communication skills. Given the nature of consulting, individuals can gain exposure to different industries and use consulting as a middleware before switching to another preferred industry. However on the other side, get exposed to different clients and industries also requires a successful Data Science consultant to be flexible in terms of working time and locations as it could be a common requirement for a business travel to client’s location occasionally. Additionally, a Data Science consultant may face strict deadlines with consistent high pressure, which can push them towards their limits. Typically, a junior Data Science consultant has their working project allocated by a Lead consultant who directly decides the scope of the whole project. As a result, it can be challenging to determine whether the next project is challenging, boring, or just right.

When discussing the promotion path of a Data Science consultant, it typically starts with a junior consultant and progresses to a senior consultant, then a lead Data Science consultant, department lead, and ultimately, a partnership position. Promoting from junior to senior generally requires 3 to 5 years of working experience and it could count into higher degree education after bachelor in some cases, for example the company could decide to directly give an individual a senior title after he/she finishes PhD. Then above that people may find lead consultant is a huge challenge to achieve as it requires deep operation within the company and show his/her management ability.

Overall, breaking into consulting as a Data Science specialist can be a difficult process in the current job market due to rigorous screening processes. However, for those who thrive on challenge, this career can provide a valuable opportunity for personal development. Taking ownership of ongoing projects and embracing responsibility is the best way to grow as a data scientist, regardless of industry.

